Mars is the fourth planet from the Sun. It is nicknamed "the Red Planet" for its orange-red appearance, readily visible from Earth.[22][23] Mars is a cold rocky desert planet with surface temperatures from −110 °C (−166 °F) to 35 °C (95 °F), and a tenuous carbon dioxide (CO2) atmosphere, which has an average surface pressure of less than a hundredth of Earth's, making the surface highly exposed to cosmic radiation. On Mars there is no liquid surface water, but water has been found in the atmosphere, forming cirrus clouds, at the polar regions as permafrost and ice caps with seasonal carbon dioxide snow, and in the ground. Its surface gravity is roughly a third of Earth's or double that of the Moon. It is half as wide as Earth, with a diameter of 6,779 km (4,212 mi), and has a surface area the size of all the dry land of Earth.

Fine dust is prevalent across the surface and the atmosphere, being picked up and spread at the low Martian gravity even by the weak wind of the tenuous atmosphere. The terrain of Mars roughly follows a north-south divide, the Martian dichotomy, with the northern hemisphere mainly consisting of relatively flat, low lying plains, and the southern hemisphere of cratered highlands. Geologically, the planet is fairly active with marsquakes trembling underneath the ground, but also hosts many enormous extinct volcanoes (the tallest is Olympus Mons, 21.9 km or 13.6 mi tall) and one of the largest canyons in the Solar System (Valles Marineris, 4,000 km or 2,500 mi long). Mars has two natural satellites that are small and irregular in shape: Phobos and Deimos. With a significant axial tilt of 25 degrees Mars experiences seasons, like Earth (which has an axial tilt of 23.5 degrees). A Martian solar year is equal to 1.88 Earth years (687 Earth days), a Martian solar day (sol) is equal to 24.6 hours.

Mars was formed approximately 4.5 billion years ago. During the Noachian period (4.5 to 3.5 billion years ago), its surface was marked by meteor impacts, valley formation, erosion, the possible presence of water oceans and the loss of its magnetosphere. The Hesperian period (3.5 to 3.3–2.9 billion years ago) was dominated by widespread volcanic activity and flooding that carved immense outflow channels. The Amazonian period, which continues to the present is the currently dominating and remaining influence on geological processes. Due to Mars's geological history, the possibility of past or present life on Mars remains an area of active scientific investigation.

Mars has been observed throughout history and has been an element in many cultures with different associations. In 1963 the first flight to Mars took place with the en-route lost Mars 1. The first successful exploration of Mars came about in 1965 with Mariner 4. 1971 saw the very first orbit around Mars and anywhere beyond the Moon (Mariner 9), as well as the first (uncontrolled) impact (Mars 2) and landing (Mars 3) on Mars. As of 2023, there are at least 11 active probes orbiting Mars or on the Martian surface. Mars is an often proposed target for future human exploration missions, though no such mission is planned yet. 