Venus is the second planet from the Sun. It is often called Earth's "twin" or "sister" planet, being orbital neighbours as well as Venus having the most similar mass and size to Earth among the planets of the Solar System. While both are rocky planets, Venus has an atmosphere much thicker and denser than Earth and any other rocky body in the Solar System. Its atmosphere is composed of mostly carbon dioxide (CO2), with a global sulfuric acid cloud cover and no liquid water. At the mean surface level the atmosphere reaches a temperature of 737 K (464 °C; 867 °F) and a pressure 92 times greater than Earth's at sea level, turning the lowest layer of the carbon dioxide atmosphere into a supercritical fluid. Venus is the third brightest object in Earth's sky, after the Moon and the Sun,[21][22] and, like Mercury, always appears relatively close to the Sun, either as a "morning star" or an "evening star", resulting from orbiting closer (inferior) to the Sun than Earth.

Compared to the other planets of the solar system, the orbit of Venus is relatively close to the orbit of Earth. Therefore, for spacecraft traveling from Earth, Venus has the lowest delta-v compared to the other planets and is often used for gravity assists and as a common waypoint for interplanetary flights from Earth. Venus and Earth stay on average to each other the second closest planets, with only the most inferior orbiting Mercury staying closer to all the Solar System planets. Venus and Earth approach each other in synodic periods of 1.6 years. The rotation of Venus has been slowed and turned against its orbital direction (retrograde) by the currents and drag of its atmosphere.[23] A Venusian day is 116.75 Earth days long, about half a Venusian solar year, which is 224.7 Earth days long, and has no moons.

Venus has a weak magnetosphere, lacking an internal dynamo it is induced by the solar wind and the atmosphere interacting. Internally, Venus has a core, mantle, and crust. Internal heat escapes through active volcanism,[24][25] resulting in resurfacing instead of plate tectonics. Venus may have had liquid surface water early in its history with a habitable environment,[26][27] before a runaway greenhouse effect evaporated any water and turned Venus into its present state.[28][29][30] Currently[when?] conditions at the cloud layer of Venus have been identified as perhaps favourable for life on Venus, which has spurred new research and missions to Venus.

Throughout human history, Venus has been ascribed particular importance in the mythology, astrology, and fiction of various cultures across the world. The planet's characteristics ultimately proved crucial for the development of astronomy. The first telescopic observations of Venus in 1610 crucially proved the heliocentric model. In 1961 Venus was for the first time visited by a spacecraft (Venera 1), as a result of the very first interplanetary flight, but only the next interplanetary spacecraft, a year later, returned data (Mariner 2). Furthermore in 1967 the first atmospheric entry (Venera 4) and in 1970 the first soft landing (Venera 7) took place, the first on another planet than Earth. The study of Venus has informed the understanding of the greenhouse effect, global warming and climate change on Earth.[31] Currently[when?] there are no active, but a range of planed Venus missions. 